# Controls

Our protagonist will be controlled by the two buttons on the front of the micro:bit. Button A will
turn to the snake's left, and button B will turn to the snake's right.

We will use the `microbit::pac::interrupt` macro to handle button presses in a concurrent way. The
interrupt will be generated by the MB2's General Purpose Input/Output Tasks and Events (GPIOTE)
peripheral.

## The `controls` module

We will need to keep track of two separate pieces of global mutable state: A reference to the
`GPIOTE` peripheral, and a record of the selected direction to turn next.

Shared data is wrapped in a `RefCell` to permit interior mutability and locking. You can learn more
about `RefCell` by reading the [RefCell documentation] and the [interior mutability chapter] of the
Rust Book].  The `RefCell` is, in turn, wrapped in a `cortex_m::interrupt::Mutex` to allow safe
access.  The Mutex provided by the `cortex_m` crate uses the concept of a [critical section].  Data
in a Mutex can only be accessed from within a function or closure passed to
`cortex_m::interrupt:free` (renamed here to `interrupt_free` for clarity), which ensures that the
code in the function or closure cannot itself be interrupted.

[RefCell documentation]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/cell/struct.RefCell.html
[interior mutability chapter]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/book/ch15-05-interior-mutability.html
[critical section]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Critical_section

### Initialization

First, we will initialize the buttons (`src/controls/init.rs`).

```rust
{{#include src/controls/init.rs}}
```

The `GPIOTE` peripheral on the nRF52 has 8 "channels", each of which can be connected to a `GPIO`
pin and configured to respond to certain events, including rising edge (transition from low to high
signal) and falling edge (high to low signal). A button is a `GPIO` pin which has high signal when
not pressed and low signal otherwise. Therefore, a button press is a falling edge.

Note the awkward use of the function `init_channel()` in initialization to avoid copy-pasting the
button initialization code. The types that the various embedded crates for the MB2 have been hiding
from you are sometimes a bit scary. I would encourage you to explore the type structure of the HAL
and PAC crates at some point, as it is a bit odd and takes getting used to. In particular, note that
each pin on the microbit has *its own unique type.* The purpose of the `degrade()` function in
initialization is to convert these to a common type that can reasonably be used as an argument to
`init_channel()` and thence to `input_pin()`.

We connect `channel0` to `button_a` and `channel1` to `button_b`. In each case, we set the button up
to generate events on a falling edge (`hi_to_lo`). We store a reference to our `GPIOTE` peripheral
in the `GPIO` Mutex. We then `unmask` `GPIOTE` interrupts, allowing them to be propagated by the
hardware, and call `unpend` to clear any interrupts with pending status (which may have been
generated prior to the interrupts being unmasked).

### Interrupt handler

Next, we write the code that handles the interrupt. We use the `interrupt` macro re-exported from
the `nrf52833_hal` crate. We define a function with the same name as the interrupt we want to handle
(you can see them all
[here](https://docs.rs/nrf52833-hal/latest/nrf52833_hal/pac/enum.Interrupt.html)) and annotate it
with `#[interrupt]` (`src/controls/interrupt.rs`).

```rust
{{#include src/controls/interrupt.rs}}
```

When a `GPIOTE` interrupt is generated, we check each button to see whether it has been pressed. If
only button A has been pressed, we record that the snake should turn to the left. If only button B
has been pressed, we record that the snake should turn to the right. In any other case, we record
that the snake should not make any turn. (Having both buttons pressed "at the same time" is
exceedingly unlikely: button presses are noted almost instantly, and this interrupt handler runs
very fast — it would be hard to get both buttons down in time for this to happen. Similarly, it
would be hard to press a button for a short enough time for this code to miss it and report that
neither button is pressed. Still, Rust enforces that you plan for these unexpected cases: the code
will not compile unless you check all the possibilities.) The relevant turn is stored in the `TURN`
Mutex. All of this happens within an `interrupt_free` block, to ensure that we cannot be interrupted
by some other event while handling this interrupt.

Finally, we expose a simple function to get the next turn (`src/controls.rs`).

```rust
{{#include src/controls.rs}}
```

This function simply returns the current value of the `TURN` Mutex. It takes a single boolean
argument, `reset`. If `reset` is `true`, the value of `TURN` is reset, i.e., set to `Turn::None`.

Next we will build support for a high-fidelity game display.
